Title: Detecting the Invasive Japanese Honeysuckle With Machine Learning

Abstract

With the rise of globalization, there has been an increased spread of invasive plant species to the United States. One particularly damaging invasive species is named the Japanese Honeysuckle (Lonicera japonica), which is a perennial woody vine with white flowers and black fruit. The East Asian vine was introduced to the United States in the 1800s as a landscape plant but quickly spread across the east and gulf coasts due to its biologically advantageous traits. Some of these traits include being aggressive and the ability to reproduce through several methods. In this study, a traditional convolutional neural network (CNN) and VGG16 CNN architecture were used to detect the vine in a dataset of test images. Moreover, these machine learning models were trained with images that contained the vine displaying its flowering traits and images that included the vine without said traits. In addition to that, some of the images that were used for training did not include the vine at all. Overall, the VGG16 model trained on photos with the traits present had the best accuracy with 94 percent, while the traditional CNN trained on the images without the traits had the lowest accuracy with 63 percent. However, all of the algorithms had an accuracy of more than 50 percent, which suggested that they were all detecting the vine to some extent in the test dataset. The results of this study supported that it was, in fact, feasible to detect the Japanese Honeysuckle with CNN machine learning methods to a large extent in a dataset of images collected from the gulf coast. In the end, this study not only confirms other research in this field but could also help conservation agencies build automated systems to detect the invasive Japanese Honeysuckle in the future.
